This lecture's about the Types of Data
Science Questions.
So last week we covered a lot
of installation and building up software
and this
week we're going to cover a little bit
more about the conceptual ideas behind
data science.
So there are, a few different kinds of
data science questions that I've listed up
here in their approximate order of
difficulty
of actually achieving the goal of that
analysis.
So it starts with descriptive, and then it
goes to exploratory, inferential,
predictive, causal, and mechanistic.
And I'm going to talk about each of these
types of analysis over the next couple of
slides.
So the first is the descriptive analysis.
So the goal here is just to describe a set
of data.
You're not trying to make any sort of
decisions based on it or anything like
that.
It's the first kind of data analysis that
was ever performed.
And it's most commonly applied when you're
talking about census data.
The description and interpretation of this
data are sort of different steps,
so you gotta describe the data and then
interpret what you've seen.
Descriptions can usually not be
generalized without additional statistical
modeling.
So in other words, you are describing what
you are seeing in this data but
you are not saying what that might be for
the next person that might come along.
So an example of a descriptive analysis is
this US census.
So this is a picture of the census twenty
ten, a website that has collected a bunch
of
information about people in the United
States and they
are not necessarily analyzing it to
predict something about, [INAUDIBLE].
Now other people or other countries
they're just trying to describe the
population.
Another descriptive ex, analysis is the
Google Ngram Viewer.
So what this is is it's a collection
of information about pairs or triplets of
words.
And so for example this is a plot over
time of the observation of those, of
the words Albert Einstein, Sherlock
Holmes, and Frankenstein
in books that have been scraped by Google.
And so, again, this isn't trying to infer
anything when making decisions.
You could do that, but this is just purely
a description of what's going on.
The next is exploratory analysis.
So here you're trying to look at some data
and find
relationships that you didn't know about
previously, but not necessarily confirm
them.
So they're good for discovering new
connections,
and they're also useful to find, for
defining
future data science projects, where you're
actually
trying to confirm the exploration that
you've performed.
They're usually not the final say on any
particular problem,
and they usually shouldn't be used for
generalizing or predicting.
The important point is that you've
probably
heard before that correlation does not
imply causation.
So, you don't want to necessarily save it.
You've discovered a relationship that is
the critical
relationship between two variables based
on exploratory analysis alone.
So here's an example of an exploratory
analysis, where we're looking at brain
images and
trying to identify regions of the brain
that
lit up in response to a particular
stimulus.
So they explored this data, and they
observed, you know,
here's a region that lights up in response
to that stimulus.
And here's another re, region that lights
up in response to the stimulus.
And they haven't necessarily confirmed
that
that, what that means, but they've just
discovered a new connection that they
hadn't seen before they had this data.
Another example that's actually hosted
here at
Johns Hopkin's is the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey.
So this is just terabytes or even more of
data that has been collected looking at
the night sky.
So it's actually pictures of the night sky
at
different times and at different places
that you can
explore to try to discover new stars or
try
to discover how different things in the
universe work together.
And so, that data is actually used for
exploration,
but not necessarily for confirming
anything that you discover.
Then inferential analysis is a goal where
you're actually
trying to take a small amount of data, on
a small number of observations, and sort
of extrapolate
that information, or generalize that
information to a larger population.
Inference is definitely the most common
goal of most
statistical models, and most statistics
you may have heard about.
It involves both estimating
some quantity that you're interested in
and
also, more importantly maybe, the
uncertainty
of that quantity that you're interested
in.
And it depends heavily both on the
population that you're looking at, the
group of
people or the group of objects that
you care about, and a sampling you've
discovered.
So this is an example of, inferential
analysis.
So the idea is, here, you're trying to
look at the,
effect of air pollution control on life
expectancy in the United States.
So, what they've done is, they haven't
analysed all of the counties in the United
States, but they've analysed, so, sort of
a
subset of the counties in the United
States.
And they're using that to try to infer
something about what's
generally happening in the relationship
between air pollution and life expectancy.
Prediction analysis is a little bit
different.
The inferential analysis is that usually a
little bit more challenging.
So the idea is to use the data on some
objects you collect the data on,
to predict the values for another object
for
the next observation that comes to the
door.
An important thing to keep in mind is that
even if
x predicts y, it does not mean that x
causes y.
That's one of the main fallacies that you
can run into when dealing with predictive
analysis.
Accurate prediction depends heavily on
measuring the right variables.
And although there are better and worse
prediction models, it's pretty
clear that more data and simple model
tends to work really well.
Prediction is very hard, especially about
the future, and so I've, I, this
is a, a funny quote that it's very
accurate actually and I've listed
some references here where you, or link to
some references here where you
can see other people who have said that
same pre, thing over and over.
So here's an example of a predictive
analysis.
So Nate Silver is one of the data
scientists I mentioned earlier and
FiveThrityEight is his blog where he tries
to predict the outcome of U.S. elections.
So what he does is he takes data from
polling and
he tries to predict what's going to happen
in the next Presidential vote.
And he was very accurate in doing that in
both
the two thousand and eight and two
thousand and twelve elections.
Here's another example, so it's another
sort of
bad example, if you were the teen in
question.
So, target figured out a teen girl
was pregnant, before her father did, by
looking
at the purchases she made, and it sent her
a flyer saying she was pregnant.
Of course, the father and girl was a
little
upset, because he didn't know that she was
pregnant.
But it was example of how you could
use data to predict characteristics of
people including metadata.
Causal analysis is a next level up.
It's substantially harder to identify
causal relationships from data.
So the idea is, what happens if you change
the values of one variable?
What will, how will that change the value
of another variable?
The gold standard for doing this in
general is
using randomized studies or randomized
controlled trials to identify causation.
And you can try to do it from just
observed data that
you have saved in the database but it's a
much harder sell.
You have to make much stronger assumptions
about
the way that your model is work, [SOUND]
working.
Causal relationships are usually
identified as average effects, in other
words, on average, if we give this
population a particular
drug, then on average they will only have
a little
bit longer then if you didn't give them
that drug.
So these are usually the gold standard for
data analysis in a particular for
most scientific applications the goal is
to
end up with a causal relationship between
variables.
So here's an example of a causal analysis.
So basically what they did was, they
actually did Fecal transplants.
It's quite a disgusting procedure of
giving people transplanting fecal matter
into different people so that the bacteria
populate their colon and they recover
better for recurrent infection of a
particular type here.
And so they were able to randomize people
to get the fecal treatments
and then they determined that his
treatment was constantly associated with
better outcomes.
Mechanistic analysis is very rarely
covered in data science, and
so it's important to keep in mind just to
keep
a full handle on all types of analyses
that could
be done, but it's very rarely the goal of
most analyses.
The idea is to understand the exact
changes and
variables that lead to exact changes in
other variables.
So this is incredibly hard to infer if the
NOIDs, data is noisy at all except in
very simple situations or in situations
that are
very nicely modeled by a deterministic set
of equations.
The most common applications where this is
possible is in the physical or engineering
sciences
where some more simplified models can
describe
a lot of the action that is happening.
And generally the only random component
when
you're doing a mechanistic analysis is
measurement error
as opposed to any of the other types of
variation you might see in data.
[SOUND] So here's an example of a
mechanistic analysis where the
idea was to try to actually discover, what
was the differences
and changes that you would make in par,
pavement design, that
would directly lead to changes in, the
functioning of that pavement.
And so those with mechanistic analysis
like I said, tend
to end up in, engineering applications or
in physics applications.
That is a quick tour of the types of
questions we will cover in data science.
[SOUND]